This morning, we'll consider the theme, consider our sympathetic high priest.
This verse from Matthew 1220 is a messianic prophecy from Isaiah.
It's from Isaiah 42 and verse 3.
And we're going to consider three questions.
First of all, what images are conveyed by a bruised reed and a smoldering wick, and
our commenters already gave us a good idea.
Second, how did fulfilling this prophecy show what a sympathetic high priest Jesus is?
And third, how are God's people following His lead today?
So first of all, what images are conveyed by a bruised reed and a smoldering wick?
In the Hebrew scriptures, prosperous, strong people were likened to beautiful flowers
or to large, stately trees.
But Isaiah did not use such an image here, rather he refers to a bruised reed, like a large
stalk of grass that was bent over and in danger of being crushed or trampled.
In fact, Isaiah used this image in 36.6.
It actually was a disparaging idiom for weakness.
And likewise, Isaiah did not refer to shining heavenly luminaries used to represent powerful
people and nations.
Instead, he used the image of a smoldering wick, like those used in common household lamps.
A dim smoldering wick was often due to lack of attention or to a low oil supply.
And eventually, the flame would die out like the lamp on the right.
Broken reeds were considered worthless.
And smoldering wicks, as we already heard, produced dim light and sometimes irritating smoke
before they were finally extinguished.
So these images represent common, lowly people who felt crushed and broken and who reviewed
as insignificant.
So how does this prophecy show what a sympathetic, high priest Jesus is?
Matthew quoted this verse after Jesus had miraculously cured a number of people.
And some of his most touching miracles were for downtrodden persons who must have felt like
a dying wick.
For example, the man who was full of leprosy who came to him begging on bended knee.
Or the death man that Jesus took aside privately, perhaps because of his insecurities.
Or the trembling woman with a flow of blood who spent all her money for a cure but just
kept getting worse.
Now their rabbis taught them there is no suffering without iniquity.
In other words, somehow they were responsible for their physical condition because of having
sinned.
And that must have made them feel even more worthless, like bruised reeds and like smoldering
wicks.
And their priests had no interest in teaching them anything.
They said this crowd, including such people that does not know the law, are accursed people.
By contrast, notice what the study note on Matthew chapter 12 and verse 20 says.
The prophecy of Isaiah 42-3 foretold Jesus' compassion, he would never extinguish the
last spark of hope in humble and downtrodden people.
Yes, Jesus cured these people physically, but he also rekindled their hope.
And Jesus' mercy and sympathy are among his qualifications as high priest.
Hebrews 2.17 said that he had to become like his brothers in all respects so that he could
become a merciful and faithful high priest.
And when we think about it, some of those that he cured became his brothers.
And notice how his sympathy toward them is highlighted in this verse in Hebrews 4 and
verse 15.
For now we'll just read the first part of the verse.
For we do not have a high priest who cannot sympathize with our weaknesses.
Now here Paul uses a double negative.
We do not have a high priest who cannot sympathize.
This is a Greek way of emphatically saying our high priest fully sympathizes with our weaknesses.
And a Bible dictionary says about the term sympathize that it describes a person who
is affected like another by the same sufferings, impressions, and emotions.
One who has fellow feeling.
Now Jesus acquired this sympathy for his brothers by seeing them up close.
Jesus didn't have leprosy, but fellow feeling impelled him to reach out and touch the
leprosy.
He was not deaf or mute, but he put his fingers in the ears of the deaf man and touched
his tongue.
He committed no sin, but he strongly defended the woman, the repentant woman, as she
washed his feet with her tears and dried them with her hair.
He wasn't repelled by human weakness and infirmity.
He sympathetically welcomed and reassured such people, and he set a pattern for his disciples
then and also a pattern for us today.
So the third question is how are God's people following His lead today?
While using His faithful slave, our high priest is figuratively opening wide the gates
of the great spiritual temple.
He invites all people, people of all sorts, to worship the Father, including those who
are often overlooked or marginalized by those around them.
For example, Jehovah's people produce publications in 105 sign languages.
All publications for the blind are available in 54 languages.
And audio descriptions for our videos are in 92 languages, and these also benefit the
blind.
And just as Jesus healed individuals, some of these publications in certain languages
are provided to give a very small number of people hope for the future to rekindle
their flame.
So like the lepers in Jesus' day, there are whole groups of people who are looked down
on and discriminated against within their own communities.
For example, on the left, the Romany people have long been misunderstood and mistreated.
The Nazis attempted genocide against them in Europe, and they still face much prejudice.
But they're welcomed in the congregations of Jehovah's people as we see in the picture
on the left.
And we have translated publications in more than 25 Romany languages.
And we see those Romany children studying publications in their language.
And thousands of them are now our brothers and sisters.
We've also produced publications in 160 languages in Amerindian languages of South, Central,
and North America.
More Indians are often poorer and marginalized in their own native lands, but many thousands
have responded to the good news.
And on the right, in India and South Asia, Dalit denotes one who is oppressed or crushed.
The Dalit people were previously known by the dehumanizing term untouchables.
And this population of well over 200 million is considered to be at the lowest level of
the Hindu caste system.
Even though laws prohibit discrimination against them, they're often treated like lepers
or treated in Jesus' day.
Many shun them and refuse to eat with or even near them.
But our brothers are welcoming a growing number of Dalits into the congregations.
They're imitating their high priest by welcoming those whose background could make them feel
like a crushed, reed or a smoldering wick.
But what about us as individuals?
At times, as our commenters mentioned, circumstances in life could make us feel that the flame of hope
that we once had and was once bright as being extinguished could be due to a personal failure,
a health issue, or a damaged relationship with a family member or a member of the congregation.
We may struggle to look beyond the present pain and focus on our hope.
But remember that our high priest, just as he saw those individual situations in his
day, he sees our individual situation.
Jehovah has empowered him to distribute Holy Spirit and also to use gifts in men in
the congregation to rekindle our spirit and to help us stand upright again.